special briefing from Downing Street I'm
delighted to be joined by dr. Jenny
Harry's ver deputy chief medical officer
today I'm going to concentrate on our
plans for the autumn for schools early
years and further education getting our
children back to school is vital part of
our national recovery from the covin 19
outbreak our children's future depend on
it
they will be the doctors for teachers
the engineers of tomorrow and we must
make sure that they are able to achieve
their dreams more and more parents are
being reassured by the measures that we
are taking to keep their children safe
and are letting them return to schools
and nurseries if they're eligible to do
so as of this week they're more than 1.6
million children back in our schools if
you're one of those parents I'd like to
say thank you for putting your trust in
us I know many of you who have had
doubts and may still do I want you to
know that I treat my responsibility for
your children with the utmost utmost
seriousness their safety their
well-being is my top priority in
welcoming more children back
we have followed not only the best
scientific advice but also what other
countries have been doing to manage a
successful return for their children and
making sure we do the same here in the
United Kingdom and my last briefing I
told you how it was my intention for all
children to be back in school for
September today I want to give you more
detail about how we're going to make
that happen but before I do I'd like
once more to thank the fantastic school
and college staff their child minders
the nursery workers and carers who are
all making a return possible schools
nurseries and earlier settings have been
welcoming more
children back since the 1st of June
they've been keeping children in small
consistent groups with stringent
infection control hygiene and cleaning
measures in place to make sure that
they're safe now that infection rates
are falling we can relax these bubbles
and from the 20th of July we can live
for restrictions on early years settings
who will be able to return to their
normal group sizes although other safety
measures must remain in place
we know that keeping contacts to a
minimum is still one of the best ways to
reduce risk of infection and from this
autumn when the whole school population
returns we're asking schools to make
sure that they continue to minimize
contacts this should be done by
distancing where possible and by keeping
classes or year groups separate from one
another we've suggested for instance the
schools may stagger Bay start and end of
the school day and that they keep their
corridors as free from congestion as
possible
minimizing movement of children we've
issued for guidance on the approach
schools and colleges should take and
they expect them to apply this in a way
that works most effectively for them
their students but also their wider
communities we know that maintaining
distance and bubbles may be more
challenging in schools where children
and young people have special
educational needs and disabilities so
we've issued specific guidance for them
if anyone in a nursery school or college
develops kovat 19 symptoms they can
already be tested but from September
we're going to give all schools and
colleges a limited number of home
testing kits to give to any children or
staff who are unable to get to a testing
center parents expect their children to
be safe in school but they also expect
them to be getting a first
class education which is why from
September we'll be asking schools to
resume a broad and ambitious curriculum
and we expect exams to be going ahead in
the summer of 2021 we want children to
be getting back to normal and enjoying
school and benefiting from it we all
know that the best place for children to
learn is in school which is why I've
been so determined to get them back
there as soon as we can from September
attendance will once again be mandatory
and no child should be out of school
unless it has been agreed this will be
crucial if we are to minimize the effect
of this pandemic on every child's
long-term educational development
I've already announced a 1 billion pound
kovat catch-up package to help children
make up lost ground including a 650
million pound catch-up premium the
state-funded primary secondary and
special schools and the 350 million
pound national tutoring program for the
most disadvantaged pupils I'm confident
that by adopting this carefully planned
return in September we're going to be in
the best possible position to recover
and rebuild our education system and
ensure that none of our children lose
out by working together we will make
sure that their hopes and dreams for the
future are not to be knocked off course
it's now an opportunity to take some
questions that like first of all to go
to Jamie from Manchester given that
schools can be subject to localized lock
down from September what steps are being
taken to improve students access to
online resources as a teacher myself I
know it's been a massive hurdle in
maintaining student progress
particularly in high pupil premium areas
well Jamie raises a really important
point and this is why we've been rolling
out over 200,000 laptops for children
from the most disadvantaged back
grouts understanding that they may not
have those resources at home for them
but on top of that creating the online
resource and support that children need
in terms of the oak national academy
we're looking at how we can continue to
build on this so it benefits every child
next we go to Leanne from Bournemouth
who asks please can you advise how
wraparound care breakfast apps school
clubs co-curricular activities will be
able to be facilitated if you groups
cannot be mixed there's an extremely
important for parents to know as many
working families rely upon this in order
for them to be able to work
Leanne makes a really important point we
recognize how vital these breakfast
clubs are the wraparound care and
provision are for the children for
parents for families and for whole
communities that's why we've been
issuing guidance to guide schools to be
able to make sure that they make this
available for parents for children
because we've all seen with our own
children how much they benefit from them
and we want to see these opening
alongside the full opening of schools in
September and we're also going to be
ensuring that the many activities that
often take place on school premises
during the summer holidays are going to
be taking place and we've been sharing
that guidance with school so they can
benefit from that as well next if we can
turn to Bronwyn Jeffries at for BBC
Branly looking at what's happening in
Leicester where teenagers are a growing
proportion of the cases aren't you now
more uncertain than you were a week ago
that having all children back all the
time in groups of up to two or three
hundred won't increase the the level of
transmission and following on from that
given that they're going to have a year
of disruption of classes yeah groups
being sent home how can you say that
they're going to have a world-class
education
Bronwyn I think
we all know how important it is to get
every child back into school so that
they can really start benefiting from a
world-class education being in the class
with their teacher learning having that
experience of being back with their
friends and we have to have the absolute
concrete determination to deliver that
for every child but we recognize that we
have been in an enormous fight to defeat
this virus and we will have to ensure
that we continue to take action to keep
on top of that and that's why we've seen
swift action in Leicester and if we need
to take further action elsewhere we will
do so but ensuring that we have a
continuity of education that's delivered
in every school is absolutely vital
I wonder Jenny if you can comment on
Leicester I think for Leicester and
clearly it's not just the teenagers what
we're seeing is a community transmission
arising cases across the community and I
think it is sad leaf olestra it's a very
good lesson for the rest of the country
in a way which is how we all need as we
go forward with the easing of lockdown
measures still to be really careful
about how we interact with others about
social distancing about washing our
hands all the things we've we've heard
of but in relation to at the age group
you're quite right that when sage for
example originally looked at the risks
and it still continues to be the case
younger children are very definitely
appear to be less of a risk
younger people overall do not experience
serious illness themselves but what the
guidance that the depart for education
has developed has done is worked with
public health England to ensure that
it's not just guidance about what is
happening in schools but it is actually
about things like transport around
advising families - if you like control
their teenagers when they're outside
coming in and in fact the original
guidance recognized that the
transmission risks were potentially more
in the in the social behaviors of the
teenagers the older children out of
school than they potentially were
in school so I think probably it's a
real message it's the the school's quite
a controlled environment and perhaps
trying to encourage families as well - I
know it's difficult because I've been
there but to try and control their
teenagers in their social interactions
outside school as well schools are also
social spaces and if you have two 300
teenagers together who haven't seen each
other for months they are not going to
be social distancing they're not going
to be observing the precautions which
you're advising the rest of the
population to do to minimize risks well
we recognize that there are challenges
but we cannot underestimate the
importance of getting every child back
into school we cannot underestimate fee
the value that our children going back
into school brings not just them but the
whole of society and that is why we
cannot sit back and we cannot be in a
position where we just say that children
are not going to go back to school and
that's why we've created a system of
controls to minimize the risk minimize
the spread of transmission and making
sure that children can return to school
safely with controls in place and
reducing via chance and the risk of any
virus being transmitted and I think
Jenny's probably better to comment on
this but what happens in Leicester was
not something about schools returning
schools play an incredibly positive part
and role in the wider society and it
would be very misleading to imply that
they had a role in terms of any form of
spread in Leicester yes I think just
picking that up as I've said we have a
community transmission picture in
Leicester there are clearly pockets
around the areas where we could see
perhaps more cases but it's very much
through young people and working working
age people right across so this is not a
picture of a particular focal point and
certainly not on schools and I think
just going back to the point you raised
and the ones that I did previously just
to reiterate schools are actually quite
controlled environments they're a bit
like workplaces in many ways we should
be more concerned with what the
teenagers are doing outside schools so
if they are in
school in a controlled environment with
hierarchies have controlled and people
keeping an eye on them if you like
that's probably a much lower risk than
if they were out of school doing their
own thing I think it's fair to say
Bronwyn as a father of two teenage
daughters I think the school has far
more control over my daughters and I've
ever been able to achieve but thank you
ever so much if we can move on to John
ray at ITV John Secretary of State why
is it taking you for long and lost
months to come up with these guidelines
a guidelines which according to the
school I've been in today well you know
they're left with profound doubts as to
whether they can make them work in time
well John I'm not sure if you noticed
but we saw a return we've already seen a
return of 1.6 over 1.6 million children
getting into school we've seen a primary
schools right across the country opening
up we've welcomed back reception nursery
year one year six years ten and twelve
and we've seen this cautious careful
phased return and we saw that first
stage of children returning to school
but we recognize there's as we have
moved forward as our battle against this
virus has become ever more successful
that we're now in a position where we
can actually welcome more children back
into school and where we're going to be
in a position in September where every
child in every school is going to have a
benefit of enjoying every class that
they want to be enjoying and that's why
we're now in a position to be able to
welcome them back and that's why after a
number of weeks of consulting with
stakeholders who've seen that first
phase that cautious careful phase of
children coming back that we're able to
say that's in September we're going to
be able to welcome back all children
then I do can I just pick a story
briefly on the point that it's making I
wonder I want I think parents will want
absolute clarity after what's happened
in Leicester are you telling parents
that there is absolutely no additional
risk sending their children back into
groups of maybe 250 pupils John what
we've seen in terms of return of schools
is we've seen as jenny has highlight is
with the creation of safe environments
and that's the type of environment that
we are going to be creating as every
child returns back to school in
September but Jenny I'm not sure if
there's anything I mean there's an
obvious point which we can't guarantee
absolute safety for anybody anywhere in
the UK so I think we just need to be
very realistic but I think your your
starting point was around why now why
not earlier and certainly as a public
health professional I would have been
quite concerned if this had been put
forward in the first few weeks when we
had an uncontrolled epidemic in the UK
but I think most importantly we knew far
less about the transmission of the
disease and particularly how it affects
children so we know a lot about how it
affects children very few pH ildren have
severe illness and so the the risk here
is around transmission and as the
secretary state said I'm the the
guidance which is there and I think it's
teachers are quite right they're looking
at it I think and thinking how do we
implement this in the setting that they
have so there is a degree of flexibility
but running beneath it our principals of
control and they are the same ones we
should all be applying in society so
walking down a corridor a very brief
transit is very unlikely to give you any
significant risk but if you are keeping
children where you can in segregated
groups you will minimize the number of
interactions so these are the same
principles that apply whether we go to a
retail outlet now whether we're working
in our town and schools are very
controlled environment so the safety
element is built into the system and I
think it's not not my area but I'm very
sure that from conversations that I've
had was with some of the teachers
working with depart for education that
teaching sites providers are finding
very innovative ways to manage that
particularly for example in the summer
actually you can have a group of
children in a lesson
outside and that reduces your risks
instantly so I think lots of innovative
ways and lots of teachers putting those
forward but John just to emphasize to
your viewers that the safety of those
children going into school and those who
work in school is absolutely our top
priority but we mustn't mustn't Muslims
at any stage forget about the value that
schools bring to every child and
actually how much we all need to ensure
that every child is back into that
classroom if we can next go to fatima
from channel 4 fatima Thank You
Secretary of State you mentioned the
government issuing laptops to
disadvantaged students we've had a
survey carried out from channel 4 news
of 800 head teachers more than half of
them say they haven't received these
laptops this morning I was filming at a
school where they told me they can't
carry out live lessons online because
some of their children just don't have
the internet don't have laptops that
they can use what is your message to
those head teachers and indeed to those
children who have been left waiting well
personally we engaged on one of the most
ambitious programs in terms of
distribution of technical equipment in
terms of laptops and also internet
rooters we've seen over 200 2,000 of
those it's distributed to local
authorities and multi-academy trust who
then pass those on to the schools we've
got 10,000 orders that are still
outstanding which will be fulfilled over
the next few days but there are a number
of local authorities and multi-academy
trust who have as yet not place their
orders but we're chasing those up and we
we've made this investment to give
children the best possible advantage and
we'll be working with the education
sector to make sure we deliver on that
next if we can go to Anna from The
Telegraph Secretary of State
pubs will be reopening this weekend but
all children won't be back to school
until September and when they do it I'll
have a watered-down curriculum and many
subjects
as the government got the things the
wrong way around and are you concerned
that you're failing a generation of
children so Anna I don't want to pick
you up but you know there is not going
to be a watered-down curriculum it is
going to be a full and total curriculum
this is going to be delivered for our
children across all subjects it's
incredibly important that we have the
same standards and rigor within our
education system as we come out of
lockdown as we had going into it and we
are not going to be in a situation where
we are going to see vital subjects cut
out of children's education so the idea
that there'll be a watered-down
curriculum is totally totally untrue and
schools will be held accountable as a
result of Ofsted inspections and the key
elements as I'm sure that you are fully
aware of in Ofsted is the quality of the
curriculum and the teaching of that
curriculum so if schools are not
delivering on that they will not be
succeeding in their Ofsted just could
you answer the question though about has
the government got its priorities the
right way around which means in school
yeah well the reality was that we've got
every other years that we got one point
six million children back into schools
already if we had been in a position
where we could have had all children
coming back into school before the
summer I have to say there is no one who
would have wanted to see that more than
I would have done there's no one who
would like to see every child back in
school in their class today but we have
been dealing with the global pandemic
and when we were in a position to make
this decision about having that phased
cautious careful return of children we
weren't in a position to say that every
child would able to be back in school
before for summaries before for summer
but what we are going to do because you
know and your readers know how important
education is the impact it has on their
lives and that's why every single child
will be back in school in September
thank you and if we can next go to Kate
Ferguson at the Sun Kate hi thanks
Secretary of State um you failed to
stick to your promise to bring all time
in torrents back to school before summer
in part because of the opposition of
some heads and councils can you promise
now that the dates won't flip again and
what action will you take against heads
and councils who refuse to reopen for
the beginning of September and if I
could just ask Jenny Harry if the
country does have another covert peak
this winter could we see another
national school shutdown recommended
right so Kate what we see today is we
see virtually every single primary
school right across the country open we
see all local authorities now accepting
the fact that they have to work with us
in order to ensure that all schools are
open and while we didn't want to we had
to highlight to some local authorities
the fact that we did have powers and we
would use those powers to ensure that
all schools open up for those pupils in
those year groups and as we move into
September we're working very closely
with a sector I have absolute confidence
right across the board everyone accepts
the fact that we've got to deliver
full-time education for every child in
this country but if we are not in a
situation where people are operating and
opening schools we will have to take
very specific action to ensure that they
do Jenny thank you yes so I think a
second a second wave is quite a
possibility that is not ruled out at all
a second peak as in an epidemic peak
another one is also not ruled out and in
fact in pandemics you can sometimes see
successive ones so we're talking about a
second but you can get waves and waves
and we're starting to say I think if you
look at the maps across the world
you can see these Peaks now rising in
regions and falling and some rising
again so the important message I think
for for the UK and for England and
schools particularly
is that everybody's worked really hard
to get past this peak and bring it down
and what we're seeing in Lester now is
what is much more likely to happen as we
go forward and that's positive in some
ways it may not feel like that if you
live in Lester at the moment but what it
should reassure parents particularly in
schools is that where there are local
rises that we start to see that the
focus of energy is on ensuring that they
do not become another peak so their
little small ones if you like around the
country in this first wave and if we
keep on top of them right across the
country and keep doing that there may be
a temporary closure for a short while as
we're seeing there and open Earth we're
much more likely then not to have to
have a national shutdown in the future
and it's not just schools of course that
we only do that if it's essential to
manage the risk to the public and
particularly to keep children safe okay
so I'm not sure if there's a further
question you'd like to ask I think can I
just ask you about that second question
would you rule out and other national
schools shut down well as Jennie
highlighted the factors we will we've
already seen in Lester that we're
decisive and clear action needed to be
taken in order to be able to dampen down
a local spike that's what we did and
that's the whole approach that the
government's taking and by taking that
player decisive action to ensure where
you see those local spikes and we have
the data and we have the information so
we can monitor it we're willing to take
it and by doing that we ensure that we
avoid the situation where we will ever
have to see a national shutdown again
but the value importance of education is
right up there to ensure that children
are not in a situation where they're not
having the benefit of being in school
but we have been clear to schools that
we're if for a reason that you do see a
local shutdown and if in the unfortunate
situation that some schools have to
close in that area
they have to have those clear continuity
of education plans so that education can
move as seamlessly on as possible if we
can move to Rachael from the Huffington
Post
Rachael hello thank you psycho - sit and
can I ask a you two questions please
the new guidance for schools published
today says that if a child tests
positive and is asked to isolate for 14
days school should offer remote
education but it is the case that a lot
of children simply don't have access to
a laptop at home can you guarantee that
by September every child who needs a
laptop will get one and secondly a
public health England report found that
people from black and minority ethnic
groups have a higher risk of death from
coronavirus are you doing anything
specific to reassure abbien parents it
is safe to send their skin kids to
school and are you really going to find
them if they don't so so Rachel firstly
we've made a big investment in terms of
technology we've seen that rolled out to
schools schools are able in a position
to be able to support children that
maybe have to isolate there will be some
children due to their specific health
conditions that may not be in a position
to be able to return to school as normal
as a result of those underlying
conditions that they have and that's a
conversation that they would have to
have with their doctor and also with
their school so that we're able to work
with that child and actually be able to
support them but we have set out clear
expectations in terms of how we expect
and we'll work with schools for them to
be able to support children much more
broadly I'm not sure if Jenny you don't
comment over so obviously the the
factors around risk variables how much
risk there is associated with your age
or your ethnicity our is new learning to
a large degree which we're working
continuously on for most young children
actually the risk is it's very similar a
dip and you know your ethnicity is
before the child themselves is probably
very similar
different ethnic groups it gets more
pronounced in terms of risk term for
older patients which are the ones you're
referring to who've often come into
hospitals and have differential outcomes
from treatment but I think we are as we
go forward we are looking at those
children for example who may have
specific conditions who need additional
support now at the moment people in the
shielded patient group those ones which
are the most clinically vulnerable are
not in school we're advising they do go
back after for the September term except
in an area for example where we've seen
raised transmission rates and in those
cases we will contact them ahead of that
so effectively parents can be assured if
they have children with high risk
characteristics that when September term
starts if there are any local issues
about that those children will be
advised but mostly for most children
risks are very very low right the way
through so they should be going back to
school and as Secretary of State has
said really important that they go back
into their education for their long-term
health and Rachel just before we move on
to Freddie what hours schools have a lot
of experience of working with families
and communities and working with them to
ensure they have maximum attendance as
possible and we would expect this
sensible approach we've got to be clear
that being in school being in education
has enormous benefit to every child and
we have to get back to the fact that we
do have a compulsory education system
but schools will use good common sense
in terms of working working with
families dealing with some of those
concerns that they may have in order to
ensure that every child is back in
school next if we can go to Freddie from
school tweak Freddie
Thank You education secretary and a lot
of pupils particularly those rural
schools rely on public transport to get
into school
doesn't your plan for bubbles fall apart
when children are crammed onto buses to
and from school every day and given the
importance of this why are you still
evaluating your position on providing
extra school transport services why
don't you have a plan already and a
second question if I may please both at
once please Freddie
yes reintroduce your reintroducing
mandatory attendance and with it absence
fines for parents as you've said this
puts headteachers in a potentially
really difficult position of having to
authorize absences of pupils where
parents feel it's not safe for their
children to return will headteachers be
penalized if they sympathize with these
parents and authorized absences for this
reason so so Freddie in terms of school
transport this is an issue that we've
been working very closely both with the
Department for Transport the Ministry of
Housing Communities and Local Government
and will be working very closely with
local authorities in terms of making
sure that depending on where we are in
terms of dealing with this virus that
the proper controls are properly in
place on school transport and some of
the information that we're sharing is
making sure that the protection of those
bubbles is in place as a result of home
to school transport going onto the issue
we have to get to a position where there
is compulsory education for every child
and if we are not in a position where we
are saying that there is an expectation
of every child to be in school unless
there is a good and proper reason for it
some of the children from the most
disadvantaged backgrounds are the ones
that are going to suffer and you know as
well as I do that it is not the first
step that schools move to in terms of
finding parents there's a whole series
of steps working with local authority
guidance to be able to work with those
families to deal with those concerns and
make sure that we have attendance of all
children but if we want to make sure
that those people from the most
disadvantaged
communities do not suffer we have to
ensure and make sure children more
broadly do not suffer we have to be
clear that attendance of school is
something this is expected of every
child unless there is a good and proper
medical reason for them not to be an
attendance well I'd like to take the
opportunity to thank everyone for
joining us today and wish you all the
best thank you see the headlines as they
happen and watch BBC news live in the
app and get the full story with BBC
dovecote UK forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with BBC
News